# Custom LiteX SoC for Analogue Pocket

This SoC is intended to serve as a host platform for any kind of software that may be useful/fun/interesting to run on the Analogue Pocket, such as calculators, cart dumpers, internet access, custom game consoles/emulation, and more. The system is constructed to provide access to as many of the Pocket's core systems as possible in a simple, software-friendly manner. As opportunities arrive, some functionality may be hardware accelerated.

The core is not intended for use by end users directly, but for developers, who may use either the distributed built assets (the `agg23.RISCV....zip` release) or this repo itself, customized to provide the experience desired.

## Features

* Full input handing
* ~~Cart slot and link port access~~ - `Coming soon`
* File access API for load/store - [See Analogue Docs](https://www.analogue.co/developer/docs/core-definition-files/data-json) - `Writing to disk coming soon`
* Vblank and vsync access; frame counter
* 48kHz audio playback with 4096 sample buffer
* Live RTC access
* Cyclone V unique chip ID access

## Hardware Definition

General RISC-V notation for this core is: `riscv32imafdc`. See [Standard Extensions](https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/risc-v/standard_extensions) to learn what each of the letters mean.

Notably, this core contains:

* 32 bit CPU, buses, RAM
* Atomics
* A FPU supporting both 32 and 64 bit floats

Pocket RAM used:

* 31% of FPGA BRAM
* SDRAM

## Getting Started

### Software Only

You can simply [download the latest release](https://github.com/agg23/openfpga-litex2/releases/latest) and start writing code. For language setup help and examples, see [Languages](/lang/README.md).

I suggest you make this repo a submodule of your main project so you can reference import libraries and files, along with pinning the core version.

### Customize Hardware

**NOTE:** You will probably have a bad time if you try to do this with Windows. It should be possible, but I just found lots of pain.

```bash
# Enter your working directory
mkdir riscv
cd riscv

# Clone repo with submodules
git clone --recursive https://github.com/agg23/openfpga-litex.git

# Create a Python virtualenv with your manager of choice
...

# Install Python dependencies
pip3 install migen pyserial
```

To build the LiteX SoC:

```bash
cd openfpga-litex/litex/
make
```

You can now build the project via Quartus, either through the UI or via CLI.

## Writing Software

[Guides and examples for several languages are available](/lang/README.md). Check those first.

The `/lang/linker/` directory contains the required linker files for you to build against the SoC. `memory.x` was written by hand, and `regions.ld` is generated by the LiteX build process and copied over to this directory.

You need to build against the [specific RISC-V extension target used by the core](#hardware-definition). Using the standard `riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc`, building for this architecture would look something like this:

```bash
riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc -march=rv32imacfd -mabi=ilp32fd
```

Notably, you _must_ build targetting the FPU (`-mabi=ilp32fd`). Software built targetting a soft-float implementation will not run.

### Accessing Control Registers

To actually do anything with the hardware, you need to access many different control registers. These provide the CPU with an interface to modify how the hardware SoC operates. LiteX provides this nice, generic mechanism for specifying control information via [the SVD file](/litex/pocket.svd). This file provides a machine readable list of all the interaction points in the SoC and provides short descriptions on how to use them. [A human readable description, with additional details, is also provided](/docs/control.md).

The SVD file can be used to generate support packages to automatically keep your program address constants up to date with the current iteration of the hardware. An example of this can be found in the [Rust `litex-pac` crate](/lang/rust/crates/litex-pac).

## Modifying the Hardware

* [Adjusting Resolution](/docs/resolution.md)